<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [Notes to self…](#notes-to-self%E2%80%A6)
  - [Birds and snails](#birds-and-snails)
    - [Questions of kid](#questions-of-kid)
    - [Poor and angry](#poor-and-angry)
    - [Another mouth to feed](#another-mouth-to-feed)
    - [Going to work](#going-to-work)
    - [Not unloved](#not-unloved)
    - [But unhugged](#but-unhugged)
    - [Not really my problems](#not-really-my-problems)
- [Some other things I tend to forget about, but possibly shouldn't…](#some-other-things-i-tend-to-forget-about-but-possibly-shouldnt%E2%80%A6)
  - [Racing! Happy!](#racing-happy)
  - [Illness](#illness)
    - [Trigger tears](#trigger-tears)
    - [Skeleton](#skeleton)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# Notes to self…

## Birds and snails

### Questions of kid

One of my strongest memories from childhood. Age 9? 10? 8? Playing in the backyard, alone. Looking for rolly-pollies, snails, etc. Over by the downspout. Hearing a bird.
Thinking "I wish I were a bird." Not because they can fly.

"Because I think they don't think about things too much. They seem pretty happy — they chirp, sing, get to fly. They do have to find food every day, and sometimes worry about other animals catching them. It's nice that I don't have to worry about those things — mom and dad take care of things like that. But I'd rather do that for a few years than be stuck with life as a human. Birds, frogs, snails... only live a few years, right? Humans live to be 70 or 80 or 90 — that means I have like 70 more years of this!"

"How did I get stuck in this situation? Mom and Dad. Why'd they have to have me? Why would any adult think it's a good idea to bring someone into the world? Life is hard, and goes on for so long. Even when there are good times, they don't out-weigh the bad times; and wouldn't it just be way better to not have been born at all?"

"But so many people do have kids — there are so many humans! All my friends' parents decided to have kids. (I know that's obvious.) But I don't know too many adults who decided not to have kids."

### Poor and angry
Around that same time — I assume a bit earlier — the economy got bad. Dad lost his job. He got some part time jobs, but never another permanent one. Money was tight. Somehow dad could always find enough to keep plenty of whiskey in the house. Even though he went through it pretty quickly. He got mad. A lot. Seemed like no dinner hour was exempt from a one-way yelling match across the table. He'd shout exasperated questions at us; sometimes we tried to answer; but all the answers were always wrong. So I mostly ate silently and avoided eye contact. But I hated it most when he got mad at Mom. Why would he yell at her like that? It wasn't her fault we didn't have much money. That happened a lot at night after we'd gone to bed. We slept with the door cracked, and my bed was near the door, so I could hear them loud and clear. (Well, dad anyway.) Seemed like it went on for hours. Mom never yelled back at him — she just took it. She did get mad at us a fair amount. We got spanked regularly — yardstick, wooden spoon, fly swatter, hands. "Wait til your dad gets home!" was always a terrorizing one. "I'll box your ears!" Then there's the classic "I'll give you something to cry about!" Sometimes my older brother and I got spanked because we were arguing or fighting with each other. We fought every damn day; I can't remember all the reasons why. (I do remember that he'd get mad at me for breathing too loud before we fell asleep. Fortunately he was kind enough never to hit me while I slept.) I eventually realized that fighting back wasn't working out that well, so I tried curling up and taking the punches. But I usually got spanked then anyway, so that didn't work out that well either.

Walking by the parents' room one time: mom was in there alone; she didn't know anyone could hear her. "Sometimes I wish I'd never had children."

When I was four and a half my sister was born. We were pretty smitten by her. Before she was walking we'd put her in a laundry basket and drag her smiling down the hallway or across the lawn. We'd tickle her tummy and play with her hair.

### Another mouth to feed
When I was nine and a half our parents told us that we'd have a fourth sibling. I remember the pit of my stomach falling. I went to my room and wondered "How could they do this again? How are we going to take care of another mouth to feed?" Once he was born I never, ever resented my little brother — we adored him.

### Going to work
When we were ten and nine my older brother and I decided we were going to get jobs. Well, he decided, and I was certainly going to get a job if he was getting one. At the time I didn't realize that this was probably an attempt to carry our weight in the family money situation. For the first half year I saved up my money to buy a bike. (Which, ironically, I didn't really get to choose. I wanted lots of gears for the big hills on the paper route, and I wanted one that fit me well. My parents thought all those gears would be confusing [super ironic, in retrospect], and — like everything we got — that it should be about two sizes too big, so I could grow into it and not have to get another one for a long time. The bike was hard to ride up the hills, hard to get on and off, and often fell over because the kickstand was too long. I hated that bike, and was sad that that's where all my money went.) Anyway, I would continue that paper route for the next 9 years (in addition to other jobs I got during the summer and winter vacations), waking up at 5:53 so I could have them delivered by the deadline. Mom helped us sometimes — especially Sundays when the papers where enormous. Dad never did. One of the many nights I heard dad fiercely haranguing mom over money I vowed to turn over every penny I made to mom so that she'd have more money to buy food and other necessities. (Full disclosure: instead of doing that, I just used it to buy groceries when I got them on my bike; and to buy my school clothes. And candy. :) (Sidebar: I haven't been unemployed since! Nor spent much time on vacation. Probably should change that.)

I didn't realize until I was an adult that so many of these things started around the same time. I'm not sure of the exact order, or how much time separated them, and I'm not saying that there's a direct line between any or all these things: dad lost job; dad drank more and shouted more; we got slapped more; little brother was born; we went to work; I heard the birds in the backyard, wished I hadn't been born, and wondered how I was going to get through 70 more years of unhappiness. For most of my life I didn't see any connections between any of them (except maybe the drinking and the shouting).

### Not unloved
Somehow I always felt our parents loved us. Mom more than dad. And I think mom loved us more than she loved dad. Why would she love a beast who was always drinking and yelling at her? They didn't say much to express that love — I guess that's how they were brought up. I do remember affection when we were very little — maybe three or four years old, sitting on mom's lap reading stories or getting tucked into bed by her. But after the early years there were no hugs, between them, or for us.

### But unhugged
I remember a time near the end of high school, talking to a teacher that had become a good friend. He was good friends with another teacher I'd had and loved — a kind, strong, grandmotherly pillar of the English department. She was affectionate with students who'd survived her tough classes, regularly hugging them when she saw them in years afterward. I was talking with my teacher friend outside her classroom; he said “Mrs. Smith said once that ‘The Jones brothers seem... unhuggable!’” I don't remember having anything to say in response. But inside I cried “I'm not unhuggable.” But it is true that it's always been very difficult for me to feel comfortable hugging people. And I've noticed many times when people seem uncomfortable, or afraid, hugging me. But I love hugs! Loving, human contact is so important. I work on initiating hugs more and feeling more relaxed and warm in them. Surprisingly (or not), even though I love my siblings more than anyone in the world, they may be the last people I'll feel comfortable hugging. I'm getting more comfortable hugging my mom, and practically enjoy hugs with my sister! But hugging my brothers is still embarrassingly very difficult.

### Not really my problems
A wise friend pointed out that all the sturm und drang, pessimism, worry, und sadness that I feel about life is not all mine. While I may have come up with those thoughts based on situations in my life, I also inherited much of them from my parents. They were clearly not happy; as a child that was the primary example I had of what it would be like to be a grown up. Once I had that view, all the additional situations that agreed with it just kept solidifying that view. It becomes calcified in your brain and you think it's the only way. A few decades of that makes it difficult to unwire. But not impossible. You have to keep reminding yourself that you got those thoughts from someone else, and it's time to disown them and get fresh ones. Yes, life is guaranteed to continue to bring new challenges and pains, but there's a helluva lot to love in life too. You gotta embrace the latter. Cuddle the crap out of it.

# Some other things I tend to forget about, but possibly shouldn't…

## Racing! Happy!
After I finished college I joined the pursuits of professional bicycle racing, in North America and Europe. It was one of the happiest times of my life.

## Illness
### Trigger tears
About two years into my racing career my brother started getting sick. He went from 5% body fat to 0%, then his muscles wasted away. I haven't discussed this with many people for a number of reasons. One of the most important is that my brother has had a code of silence around it that I've always honored. I'm discussing it now because it was hurting me too much not to. I started realizing this when I'd be talking to a therapist I'd being seeing for a while. We'd discussed many intense things. I never broke down crying, until I started talking about my brother and this era in our lives. I'd never cried like that before in my life. Uncontrollable, deep sobbing. It comes back every few paragraphs as I write this.

### Skeleton
When I saw him shirtless I saw his collarbones like a coathanger, ribs countable from afar, outline of his pelvis visible through his cycling shorts. I realized I'd seen that condition before — in photographs of people starving to death in Auschwitz. (That's not hyperbole. I wouldn't say something like that lightly.) Even fully clothed, his walking gait reminded me of animations I'd seen of skeletons walking — a noticeably different movement than that of a normal human.

It caused rifts in our family, with mom and dad thinking he just needed to force-feed himself more food. They'd get in intense arguments with him, terrified because he was dying and they were powerless, and he couldn't do what they thought would help him. He'd retreat in shaken frustration, weakness, and fear. Foaming at the mouth, wanting just to be healthy and normal and to be loved and understood by our parents. I wanted to force feed him too, but I realized that what he needed more than anything was someone who took his side no matter what, so I did that. He wanted to apply for a particular job, but couldn't manage to complete the application essays, no matter how hard he tried; so I eventually wrote it for him. Because of his compromised decision-making ability, he got caught in a situation with police and the law. He was terrified and wanted no one to know. I worked with a lawyer friend to help him through it. When I had a break from racing, I'd stay at my parents' home, with my brother. The house needed a new roof, and my brother and I saw that it was a narrow opportunity to add skylights and a lot more sunlight to the dark end of the house. The parents where reliably reluctant to consider such a wild idea. We were both desperate for more light in the winter, so we fought hard to figure out the details and we lobbied for it relentlessly. The dark area we wanted lit was constrained to a spot directly below the ridgeline of the roof, so I had to convince them I could design it with an elbow corner halfway up. Laying the sheetrock for it was even trickier than designing it, but I was able to get it done. He wanted to go to grad school, so I taught him the GRE. Just before the test, he knew he still wouldn't do great, so he boldly asked me if I'd pretend to be him and take it in his place. So I broke the law for him, so he could have near-perfect scores. He wanted to take the LSAT, so I learned how to master it so I could teach it to him. He visited me in Europe, and traveled solo most of the time while I had team obligations. I loaned him my extra racing bike to get around. It got stolen from him, and he got mugged and beaten twice. During one of my weeks off we met in Venice. I remember one hot night, sitting on an empty dock, talking about his condition. I told him "When I get home, getting you better is my number one priority. We can't stop until we do." (Bookmark that.) When I moved back to the States he was living with constant skeletal pain, and asked me to massage and align his bones. He looked so fragile, and wanted such pressure. Not having any expertise, I was afraid I'd do something wrong and break him. He asked if I'd take the massage training course at the local community college, so I gladly did. He was going to come to the class to receive the massages from me, but he had trouble getting anywhere on time, so he missed most of them. He didn't have any social outlets, so he'd ask to come along with me to mine, so I'd bring him. He'd drink too much and I'd get embarrassed, so I'd leave the party early with him. He got audited by the IRS, so I studied the tax code and defended him in the audit. He got investigated by law enforcement again — I don't really remember why. He called me when they were coming to search his apartment, wanting me to stand by him. I rushed over immediately — I didn't want police brutalizing my older, littler brother. One of my greatest regrets is that I wasn't able to do more for him. He got a rx that needed to be injected into his gluteus every day; he asked if I would do it. I'm so afraid of needles. And have no medical experience like that. And I knew from my steroid-taking teammates that it was possible to self-administer that way. Because he had to focus so hard on staying alive and finding medical help, he often couldn't maintain typical standards of social interaction. He'd be very late to meet people or never get around to doing things. At Christmas we used to buy presents for each person in our family. There were a few years when all of us bought presents for each person, but he hadn't been able to get around to that. I could tell that he felt bad about it, but also that he felt so miserable about everything else in his life that this embarrassment hardly registered. (My other siblings and I eventually realized it'd be better if we ended the tradition, instead just grouping together to get something for our parents.) I remember realizing that I hadn't seen him smile since he was a child. Some people considered his demeanor and interactions rude. There wasn't a lot of "please" or "thank you." After one incident a friend (unfairly) used the word "sociopath" to describe him. Some people thought I shouldn't "put up with that." I told them "Maybe you don't understand what he's going through. I think we can't imagine how hard that is, or how we'd act if we were fighting for our lives, every day, year after year."

This paragraph is one of the hardest to write. Remember the bookmarked declaration from Venice? My brother did. Years after that, after trying to help him with so many things, there were times when I felt stretched too thin. Times when I felt I had to focus on things in my own life. While I helped him with things that I was good at, I didn't help him doggedly pursue all the medical possibilities — so many of them frustrating dead ends. I was infuriated that his doctors couldn't figure out what was wrong with him — had no one in the world ever had this condition before?! I hoped that if one doctor hadn't that they'd refer him onward until someone knew it and could help him. While he searched relentlessly for help, I wasn't helping him in that particular way. At one point in a discussion with him he said something like "You said your number one priority was getting me better." I'd been thinking about that too, and I felt like I'd failed on my promise.

He suffered so tremendously and unfairly. I remember being in the house some days, with him in his bedroom and everything quiet; then a loud roar of anguish and desperation. Some dark, cold nights we got into deeper thoughts about how it was going, and what to do next. "If something doesn't change soon..." — I could sense the intimations of suicide. I steered away from those questions as quickly as possible. Because I felt that way myself. And he was obviously a million times worse off than me.

My own struggles with suicide existed for a long time. As I mentioned at the top, I've never thought "I'm so thankful to be alive!" I always thought life was not a gift, but a curse. Sometimes when brother was really hurting I thought it'd be a gift to — I shudder to even think about it now — take him out of that misery then I was taking myself out of my own mental misery. And when dad was really mean I thought it would make the rest of the family's lives so much better if he weren't around. (Sorry, Dad! I know it's not 100% your fault that you're a cold, mean, misogynist person who can't express love or any feeling or thought other than anger.) So sometimes my suicidal thoughts involved bringing them with me. Sometimes I thought it would be a favor to my mom and other siblings too. But deep down I knew that trying to remove the suffering parts wouldn't actually make things better for them. Let me be clear: I'm very glad I dodged those bullets. Things can get better.

And my brother got better! He's now a veritable strongman, has a great job and an active social life. He'll always have the emotional scars from the era of the illness.

Years and years after this era, I mostly don't remember any of these things. I'm so happy he's okay now. But I also get sad and mad because I know scars basically last forever. Every few years I think about the dark days and break down in an unexpected deluge of tears. Like during most of this writing.

Unrelated, and much more recently, my sister had a baby — the first grandchild of my parents. It was wonderful. A couple of months later, post-partum depression made it's ugly appearance, and hit her very, very hard. She felt overwhelmed, trapped, and had flashbacks to difficult, complicated things from childhood. And that's just the logical sadness; depression of any kind goes way beyond any logic. One night she nearly drank herself to death. When her husband got home he called 911; the ambulance brought her to the hospital; thank god she survived. Helping her get through that became the most important thing in my life.

Processing

I know life isn't like this for everyone. And we are not our parents. We can do better. And I know how fortunate and blessed my life has been — so many people have so much more pain and suffering. I'm neither malcontent nor a misanthrope. I'm the opposite of those. I know how fortunate I am. I was born American, which randomly put me in the richest 1% of the world (even though it never felt that way). I was born male, which to this day is still an obscenely unfair advantage in far too many things. I was born white, a possibly more obscenely unfair advantage in our society. I was born straight, another easy setting in the game of life. I randomly got an unfairly large portion of "intelligence" (in the way our culture tends to measure it), and a larger, equally random, portion of physical fitness. (If you judge by college degrees and professional sports.) Wtff. I've had the joy of loving relationships with some of the most wonderful and beautiful people I can imagine, and shared intimacy and love to a depth I never knew was possible when I was growing up. I have siblings and friends who are off-the-charts wonderful, kind, smart, hilarious, loving. (I only write these things because this is anonymous, and to illustrate that my sadness about life isn't because I think I got an unfair lot. I'm not complaining about my life. I'm just complaining about life, in general.) My parents might not have been flawless, but they loved us, even though they weren't great at showing it. They meant well and raised me with good morals. For some reason or other I think I ended up with an unusually large portion of empathy too, for better or for worse. For better: I get along with most people very well; I try to see things from others' points of view, and often tend to assume they had understandable reasons even if they had puzzling actions. For worse: it pains me a lot to see anyone suffer. And the world is full of suffering. Life is suffering.

So "processing." I've never been married. I've been in loving relationships with truly wonderful people whom I admire, respect, and love in every possible way. Who are kind, sexy, made me laugh, and who admired, cared for, and respected me in kind. After about a year of growing increasingly close to each other, of getting so used to having that love, I get deathly afraid of losing it, or of failing to live up to the standard, of disappointing that person at some point way down the line. I know that even if two people can promise things to each other, no one can guarantee those things. There are no wizards — no one can predict what happens in the future. I've worked hard with partners to maintain autonomy and avoid co-dependence while growing closer together. But two things interfere: the retreat to self-protection, and the refusal to take a path that might ever hurt someone I love so much. Overall I agree with Tennyson that "'Tis better to have loved and lost, then never to have loved at all." But when that loss comes, it's really hard to feel that way. I know being wed shouldn't mean that you alone are responsible for your partner's happiness. But it's hard not to want to do as much as you can to bring happiness to them. I take that very seriously. Maybe subconsciously that reminds me of trying to do all I could to support my family when I started that little paper route, or of doing anything asked of me to help my brother not die. And subconsciously I've feared seeing someone I love so much go through all that suffering. That's the visceral terror I've held below the surface, the one that makes me break down in tears when I think about it. Not everyone has a sibling that they were so close to, but I think a good analogy is having a spouse that you see getting physically and emotional tortured every single day for many years, and not being able to free them from that. My brother has been healthy for about five years now, but it's taken a long time for me to believe it, get used to it, let down my vigilance, and begin to gain hindsight. I need to realize that I don't have to continue to hold that fear and vigilance.

…

